.design.md, before:

This is a Python-based service following the Triple Hexagonal Architecture pattern.
It uses protocol/provider pairs and dependency injection mechanisms provided by the
[hexkit](https://github.com/ghga-de/hexkit) library.

### Typical operation

This service doesn't have a REST API or use a database for anything.
It's a straightforward service running a Kafka consumer that listens for one kind of event.
Notification events are picked up by the consumer, validated against the Notification event schema, and sent to the Notifier module.
The Notifier looks at the notification event details and determines what to do with it.
Right now, this always means sending an email.
The information is sent to the SMTP client, where a secure connection is established and the email is dispatched.

### Testing
The only notable thing about the test setup is that it uses a local test server (tests/fixtures/server.py) via aiosmtpd, which has sort of replaced the old smtpd module. There is a DummyServer, which has an 'expect_email()' method that is used similarly to the expect_events() method from hexkit's kafka testing module. It can perform simple a authentication check so error handling can be tested. When an email is sent to the test server, the connection is closed and the received/expected emails are compared to make sure that the header and body content is intact. This enables testing the flow of sending an email without actually issuing any real emails and without using real credentials.

Commit message:

Added info on email templates

.design.md, after:

This is a Python-based service following the Triple Hexagonal Architecture pattern.
It uses protocol/provider pairs and dependency injection mechanisms provided by the
[hexkit](https://github.com/ghga-de/hexkit) library.

### Typical operation

This service doesn't have a REST API or use a database for anything.
It's a straightforward service running a Kafka consumer that listens for one kind of event.
Notification events are picked up by the consumer, validated against the Notification event schema, and sent to the Notifier module.
The Notifier looks at the notification event details and determines what to do with it.
Right now, this always means sending an email.
The information is sent to the SMTP client, where a secure connection is established and the email is dispatched.

### Email Templates

In the configuration there are two _template requirements: a plaintext email template and an HTML email template. The point of these is to produce consistently formatted emails while keeping the requirements light for microservices trying to send notifications. The templates are both used to make the email. Template variables are denoted with "$", e.g. $recipient_name, and are required to match the notification schema field names defined [here](https://github.com/ghga-de/ghga-event-schemas/blob/8e535ac271e7f27b6132505aad8cf572decc7ab4/ghga_event_schemas/pydantic_.py#L304). Having both HTML and plaintext means everyone should be able to receive the emails without a problem, and most of the time they should look nice. Because email clients like Outlook, Gmail, etc. have differences in the way they render HTML emails, it is recommended that styling be kept to a minimum or to use a pre-made template where these things have been taken into account.

### Testing
The only notable thing about the test setup is that it uses a local test server (tests/fixtures/server.py) via [aiosmtpd](https://aiosmtpd.readthedocs.io/en/latest/), which has sort of replaced the old smtpd module. There is a DummyServer, which has an 'expect_email()' method that is used similarly to the [expect_events()](https://github.com/ghga-de/hexkit/blob/7382c19b84136ea5b1652087ba1da4890267b1b5/hexkit/providers/akafka/testutils.py#L368) method from hexkit's kafka testing module. It can perform simple a authentication check so error handling can be tested. When an email is sent to the test server, the connection is closed and the received/expected emails are compared to make sure that the header and body content is intact. This enables testing the flow of sending an email without actually issuing any real emails and without using real credentials.
